---
layout: post
title: "On writing C"
---

A few days ago I had to write some C code again. I haven't written a single line
of C since freshman year. And that was 5 years ago. That is a long time and
this [little home assignment](https://github.com/tmichel/chatd) made me realize
a few things.

In high school I already picked up some programming skills. The first year of
university I lived off of these. Understanding new concepts and algorithms was
easy and C seemed like just like any other programming language I had
encountered up until that point. It had little quirks, but I was not bothered
that much.

Using C was uncomfortable. I had to type much more, I missed strings and an
infinite standard library. I just couldn't understand why I had to re-implement
all the string manipulation functions when somebody else have already done it,
it's all there and ready to be used. I couldn't understand why I had to rebuild
the building blocks instead of just using them and creating something worthy.
Now I understand.

Now I know that learning the basics is invaluable. It is boring and tiresome,
but it is a must. It has to be enforced upon you, otherwise an _I-already-know-everything_
young titan would simply ignore it and die horribly when he has to
really understand a problem to fix it.

Diving into C and the linux api after 5 years was interesting. I needed two days
to catch up to speed. I've avoided manual memory management, zero terminated
strings and obscure function names for a long time. After I got used to it
again, it seemed like the world opened up. C felt liberating.

I felt like a god. I could create anything. The computer's memory is my
playground and I can shape it the way I like it. No one tells me how to allocate
chunks of memory and how to use them. Close to the metal I felt like a child
again. The constraints of higher level languages were all gone. It was like
playing with Lego, but the instruction manual was out of reach and only my
creativity could restrict me.

C is freedom. It is a burden and a gift at the same time. It's pure engineering,
when you can lose yourself in the nitty-gritty details of implementing something
instead of focusing on the end goal and user satisfaction. It is the perfect
playground, but it is poorly suited to be a _first language_ for the CS
students. I almost missed out on C, because of the bad memories and scars that I
have due to not understanding it properly. I needed to spend 5 years writing
high level stuff to really appreciate what C can offer.
